I got to ask you, some people think that, uh,
many of the observations he had describing could be described by a
primordial black hole first, what is a primordial black hole.
And what do you think about this idea? Yeah.
So primordial black hole is a black hole,
which has made not through the usual pathway of making a black hole,
um, which is that you have a star, which is a more massive than, you know,
1.4 or so solar masses.
And basically when it runs out of fuel, uh,
runs out of its nuclear fusion fuel, it can't hold itself up anymore.
And just the whole thing collapses on itself. Right. And you create a,
um, I mean, one, I guess,
simple way to think about it as you create an object with zero radius that has
mass, but zero radius singularity.
Now that's such black holes exist all over the place and the galaxy there's in
fact, a really big one at the center of the galaxy that sacrifice that,
that one's always looking at you when you're not looking right. And it's,
it's always talking about you and when you turn.
Off the lights, it's it, it wakes up that's right.
Um, you know, so such black holes are all over the place. We,
when they merge, we get to see, you know,
incredible gravitational waves that they emit, et cetera, et cetera.
One kind of plausible scenario. However,
is that when the universe was forming, basically during the big bang,
you created a whole spectrum of black holes, uh,
some with masses of five earth masses, masses of 10 earth masses,
like the entire mass spectrum size,
the ma some the massive asteroids now on the
smaller end, over the lifetime of the universe,
the smaller ones kind of evaporate. Uh, and they're not there anymore.
At least this is what we, uh, what the calculations tell us. Uh,
but five earth masses is big enough to not have evaporated.
So one idea is that planet nine is not a planet.
And instead it is a five earth mass black hole.
And that's why it's hard to find now, um,
can we right away from our calculations say that's definitely true,
or that's not true. Absolutely not. We can't. In fact,
our calculations tell you nothing other than the
orbit and the mass. And that means the black hole.
I mean, it could be a five earth mass, you know, cup.
It could be a five earth mass hedgehog or a black hole,
or really anything that's five earth masses will do because the gravity of a
black hole is no different than the gravity of a planet. Right?
If the sun became a black hole tomorrow, it would be dark,
but the earth would keep orbiting it. And like this notion that oh,
black holes suck everything in it. It's, it's not,
that's like a scifi notion I should.
What would be the difference between a black hole and a planet in terms of
observationally.
Uh, observationally,
the difference would be that you will never find the black hole, right?
The truth is they're kind of, um, I'm actually not, you know,
I never looked into this very carefully, but there,
there are some constraints that you can get just statistically say,
okay, if the sun has a binary companion,
which is a five earth mass black hole,
then that means blood such black holes would be extremely common.
And, you know, you can sort of look for Lenzing events and then you say, okay,
maybe that's not so likely, but you know, that said,
I want to emphasize that there's a limit to what our calculations, uh,
can tell you that's do orbit in the mess. So.
So I think there's a bunch like ed Witten,
I think wishes it's a black hole because I think one exciting things
about black holes in our solar system is that we can go there and we
can maybe study the singularity somehow,
because that allows us to understand some fundamental things about physics, if,
um, it's a planet. So planet nine, we may not, you know, and we go there,
we may not discover anything profoundly new.
The interesting thing,
perhaps you can correct me about planet nine is like the big picture of it,
the whole big story of the type of belt and all those kinds of things.
It's not that planet nine will be somehow fundamentally different from,
um, from, I don't know, Neptune in terms of, um,
in terms of the kinds of things we can learn from it.
So I think that there's kind of a hope that it's a black hole because it's an
entirely new kind of object. Maybe you can correct me.
Oh yeah. I mean, uh,
of course here my own biases creep in because I'm interested
in planets around other stars.
And I would say I would disagree that, you know,
we wouldn't find things that would be truly, you know,
fundamentally new. Um, because as it turns out, the,
the galaxy is really good at making five or three earth mass
objects, right?
The most common type of planet that we see that we
discover orbiting around other stars.
There's a few earth masses in the solar system. There's no analog for that,
right. We go from one earth mass object,
which is this one and two skipping to Neptune and Uranus,
which themselves are actually relatively poorly understood. I would say,
especially Uranus from the interior structure point of view,
if planet nine is a planet going there will give us the closest window
and to understanding what other planets look like. And, um,
I will, you know, I'll say this, that, you know,
planets kind of in terms of their complexity on some logarithmic scale
fall somewhere between a star and an insect, right.
And the insect is way more complicated than a star, right. Uh,
and just all kinds of physical processes and really biochemical processes
that occur inside of an insect that just make a
star look like, you know,
somebody who is like playing with the spring or something. Right. So the,
I think, you know, it would be, you know, arguably,
you know, more interesting to go to, um, you know,
to go to planet nine, if it's a planet because black holes are simple,
they're just kind of,
they're basically macroscopic like particles. Yeah.
Um, just like a starlet, you mentioned terms of complexity.
So it is possible that planet nine,
as opposed to being like homogeneous is like super like heterogeneous as a bunch
of cool stuff going on that could give us intuition. I never thought about that.
That it's just basically earth number two in terms of size
and gives us stars giving us intuition that could be generalizable to
Earth-like planets elsewhere in the galaxy.
Pluto is also in the sense, like, you know, Pluto's a tiny, tiny thing,
right? Just like you would imagine that it's just a tiny ball of ice,
like who cares? But the new horizons,
images of Pluto reveals so much remarkable structure, right.
They reveal glaciers flowing, and these are glaciers not made out of water ice,
but you know, COI ice.
It turns out at those temperatures right.
Of like 40 or so Kelvin water, ice looks like metal, right.
It just doesn't flow at all.
But then ice made up of carbon monoxide starts to flow.
I mean, there's just like all kinds of really cool, uh,
phenomena that you otherwise just wouldn't really even imagine, uh,
that occur. So, yeah. I mean, there's a reason why like, planets.
Well, let me ask you, I find, uh,
as I read the idea that Edwin was thinking about this kind of stuff,
fascinating. So he he's a mathematical physicist. Uh, who's uh,
very interested in string theory. One, the fields metal, uh,
for his work in mathematics.
So I read that he proposed a fleet of probes accelerated by
radiation pressure that could discover a planet, nine primordial,
black holes location. Uh,
what do you think about this idea of sending a much a probes out there?
Yeah, look, uh, the way the, the idea is a cool one, right?
You go and you say no launch,
and basically isotropically you track where they go. And, uh, if I,
the idea correctly, you basically measure the deflection and you say, okay,
that must be something there since the,
the probe trajectories are being altered.
So the measurement, the basic sensory mechanism is the,
it's not like gift census on the probes.
It's more like you're because you're very precise, able to capture,
to measure the trajectory of the probes.
You can then in further gravitational fields. And.
I think that's the basic idea. Um, you know,
back a few years ago, we had, uh, conversations like these with, um,
you know, engineers from JPL.
They more or less convinced me that this is more,
much more difficult than it seems because you don't at that level of
precision, right. Things like solar flares matter, right.
Solar flares, right. Are completely counter.
You can't predict which where a solar flare we'll have them done.
We'll drive radiation, pressure gradients.
You don't know where every single asteroid is. So like actually doing that,
um, problem, I think it's possible, but it's,
it's not a trivial matter.